LOAD CSV review (#1)
rsill-neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/clauses/load-csv.adoc

:description: `LOAD CSV` is used to import data from CSV files into a Neo4j database.

= LOAD CSV

`LOAD CSV` is used to import data from CSV files.

[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV
FROM 'https://data.neo4j.com/bands/artists.csv' // <1>
AS row  // <2>
MERGE (:Artist {name: row[1], year: toInteger(row[2])})  // <3>
----

<1> `FROM` takes a string containing the path where the CSV file is located.

> <2> The clause parses one row at a time, temporarily storing the current row in the variable name specified with `AS`.

Author: ```suggestion
<2> The clause parses one row at a time, temporarily storing the current row in the variable specified with `AS`.
```

> <3> Use the row variable to access data in subsequent clauses, which may process and insert it into the database.

Author: ```suggestion
<3> Use the row variable to access data in subsequent clauses, which may process and insert it into the database.
```
i'd drop the which-sentence. if we keep it, what does "it" refer to?

=== Import local files

> You can store CSV files on the database server and then access them by using a `+file:///+` URL. By default, paths are resolved relative to the Neo4j installation folder.

Author: ```suggestion
You can store CSV files on the database server and then access them by using a `+file:///+` URL.
By default, paths are resolved relative to the Neo4j installation folder.
```

Properties set: 8
Labels added: 4
----
====

[NOTE]

> It's not possible to use `LOAD CSV` with file URLs against an Aura instance, only remote URLs are supported.

Author: against -> from/in/within

Properties set: 8
Labels added: 4
----
====

=== Import compressed CSV files

`LOAD CSV` can read local CSV files compressed with ZIP or gzip.

> ZIP archives can have arbitrary directory structures but may only contain a single CSV file. (so it travels down the dir tree? I gather it doesn't hold for gzip?)

Author: based on my tests, it looks like that's what it does.
gzip only allows a single file, no directories.

.Import a CSV file from within a ZIP file
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'file:///artists.zip' AS row
MERGE (:Artist {name: row[1], year: toInteger(row[2])})
----

=== Create uniqueness constraints

Always create uniqueness xref:constraints/index.adoc[constraints] prior to importing data, to avoid duplicates or colliding entities.

> If the source file contains duplicated data and the right constraints are in place, Cypher will raise an error (skipping only the duplicated rows, or aborting the whole import?)

Author: ```suggestion
If the source file contains duplicated data and the right constraints are in place, Cypher raises an error.
```

good question - i suspect it's just the individual MERGE statement which fails but we should double-check

> .Create xref:constraints/examples.adoc#constraints-examples-node-uniqueness[node property uniqueness constraints] on person ID

Author: not sure about the link in the block title here (text color is grey, doesn't optimally communicate "clickable link")

Labels added: 868
Transactions committed: 5
----
====

=== Import data from relational databases

> If the source data comes from a relational model, it's worth evaluating whether there's anything to gain in the move to a graph data model.

Author: what does "anything to gain" mean here?

Before running the import, think about how the data can be modeled as a graph, and adapt its structure accordingly when running the import (see link:https://neo4j.com/docs/getting-started/data-modeling/guide-data-modeling/[Graph data modeling]).

> Data from relational databases may consist in one or multiple CSV files, depending on the source database structure.

Author: ```suggestion
Data from relational databases may consist of one or multiple CSV files, depending on the source database structure.
```

> In either cases, the most performant approach is to run multiple passes of `LOAD CSV` to import nodes separately from relationships.

Author: ```suggestion
In either case, the most performant approach is to run multiple passes of `LOAD CSV` to import nodes separately from relationships.
```

.Import from a single CSV file
====
The source file link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/books.csv[_books.csv_] contains information about both authors and books.
From a graph perspective, these are nodes with different labels, so it takes different queries to load them.

> The example executes multiple passes of `LOAD CSV` on that one file, and each pass focuses on the creation of _one_ entity.

Author: nitpicky, but wouldn't a single entity be a single node? if so, "type of entity" would work

> This is the best performant practice, see <<_separate_creation_of_nodes_and_relationships>>.

Author: best performant -> most performant? (as in line 219 above)

MERGE (a)-[:WROTE]->(b);
----

no result?

====

.Import from multiple CSV files
====
The file link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/acted_in.csv[_acted_in.csv_] contains data about the relationship between actors and the movies they acted in (from link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/persons.csv[_persons.csv_] and link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/movies.csv[_movies.csv_]).
Actors and movies are linked through their ID columns `person_tmdbId` and `movieId`.

> The file also holds the role the actor played in the movie, and is imported in Neo4j as a relationship property.

Author: ```suggestion
The file also contains the role the actor played in the movie.
The role is imported in Neo4j as a relationship property.
```

Relationships created: 372
Properties set: 2294
----
====

[TIP]
For a guide on importing the Northwind dataset from Postgres into Neo4j, see link:https://neo4j.com/docs/getting-started/appendix/tutorials/guide-import-relational-and-etl/[Tutorial: Import data from a relational database into Neo4j].

==== Create additional node labels

In Neo4j a node can have multiple labels, while in a relational setting it's not as straightforward to mix entities.

> For example, a node in Neo4j can be labelled both as `Dog` and `Actor`, while in a relational model dogs and actors are separate entities.

Author: ```suggestion
For example, a node in Neo4j can be labeled both `Dog` and `Actor`, while in a relational model dogs and actors are separate entities.
```

> After a relational dataset has been imported, there may be further labels that can be added, depending on the use-case you intend to use the dataset for.

Author: ```suggestion
After a relational dataset has been imported, there may be further labels that can be added, depending on the use case.
```

> Labels are one of the most performant ways of pinpointing a node, so adding more of them can be beneficial for performance.

Author: ```suggestion
Additional labels create subsets of nodes which can greatly increase performance if you use them in your queries.
```

tried to explain what labels do, and also to avoid "performant ways" <-> "beneficial for performance"

.Add extra `Actor` label on `Person` nodes
====
The `ACTED_IN` relationship from _acted_in.csv_ implicitly defines actors as a subset of people.

> The following queries adds an additional `Actor` label to all people who have acted in something.

Author: ```suggestion
The following query adds an additional `Actor` label to all people who have an outgoing `ACTED_IN` relationship.
```

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person)-[:ACTED_IN]->()
WITH DISTINCT p SET p:Actor
----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult"]
----
+-------------------+
| No data returned. |
+-------------------+
Labels added: 104
----
====

== Pre-process the data during import

=== Cast CSV columns to Neo4j data types

`LOAD CSV` inserts all imported CSV data as string properties.

> Neo4j supports however a range of xref:values-and-types/index.adoc[data types], and storing data in its most appropriate type allows both to query it more effectively and to process it with type-specific Cypher functions.

Author: ```suggestion
However, Neo4j supports a range of xref:values-and-types/index.adoc[data types].
Storing data with appropriate types allows both to query it more effectively and to process it with type-specific Cypher functions.
```

> For these reasons, there's value in casting non-string values to the relevant Cypher types while importing it.

Author: i'd drop this sentence

The examples show several options of treating null values.

.companies.csv
[source, csv, filename=companies.csv]
----
Id,Name,Location,Email,BusinessType
1,Neo4j,San Mateo,contact@neo4j.com,P
2,AAA,,info@aaa.com,,
3,BBB,Chicago,,G
----

.Skip null values
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'file:///companies.csv' AS row
WITH row WHERE row.Id IS NOT NULL
MERGE (c:Company {companyId: row.Id});
----

.Provide a default for null values
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'file:///companies.csv' AS row
MERGE (c:Company {companyId: row.Id, hqLocation: coalesce(row.Location, "Unknown")})
----

.Change empty strings to null values (not stored)
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM 'file:///companies.csv' AS row
MERGE (c:Company {companyId: row.Id})
SET c.emailAddress = CASE trim(row.Email) WHEN "" THEN null ELSE row.Email END
----
====

[TIP]
Because null values are not stored in the database, a strategy for selectively getting rid of some values is to map them into null values.

=== Split list values

The function `split()` allows to convert a string of elements into a list.

> .Parse movies languages and genres as lists

Author: ```suggestion
.Parse movie languages and genres as lists
```

====
The file link:https://data.neo4j.com/importing-cypher/movies.csv[_movies.csv_] contains a header line and a total of 94 lines.

The columns `languages` and `genres` contain list-like values.

> Both lists are separated by a pipe `|`, and `split()` allows to make them into Cypher lists ahead of inserting them into the database.

Author: ```suggestion
Both lists are separated by a pipe `|`.
The `split()` function allows to make them into Cypher lists before inserting them into the database.
```

Properties set: 8
Labels added: 4
----
====

=== Field delimiter

The default field delimiter is `,`.
Use the `FIELDTERMINATOR` option to specify a different field delimiter.

> If you try to import a file that doesn't use `,` as field delimiter, but don't specify a custom delimiter, `LOAD CSV` will interpret the example CSV as having a single column. (but multiple rows?)

Author: ```suggestion
If you try to import a file that doesn't use `,` as field delimiter and you also don't specify a custom delimiter, `LOAD CSV` interprets the CSV as having a single column.
```
rows i think depend on the line terminator

Properties set: 8
Labels added: 4
----
====

[NOTE]
You can use the hexadecimal representation of the unicode character for the field delimiter if you prepend `{backslash}u`.
Write the encoding with four digits: for example, `{backslash}u003B` is equivalent to `;` (semicolon).

=== Quotes escaping

> Quoted strings are allowed in the CSV file and the quotes are dropped when `LOAD CSV` reads the data. If quoted strings need to contain quote charachters `"`, there are two ways to escape them:

Author: ```suggestion
Quoted strings are allowed in the CSV file and the quotes are dropped when `LOAD CSV` reads the data.
If quoted strings must contain quote charachters `"`, there are two ways to escape them:
```

.Import a CSV with double-quotes escaping
====
.artists-with-escaped-quotes.csv
[source, csv, filename="artists-with-escaped-quotes.csv"]
----
"1","The ""Symbol""","1992"
"1","The \"Symbol\"","1992"
----

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
LOAD CSV FROM 'file:///artists-with-escaped-quotes.csv' AS row
MERGE (a:Artist {name: row[1], year: toInteger(row[2])})
RETURN
  a.name AS name,
  a.year AS year,
  size(a.name) AS size
----

.Result
[source, role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="3*<m"]
|===
| name | year | size
| 'The "Symbol"' | 1992 | 12
| 'The "Symbol"' | 1992 | 12
3+d| Nodes created: 2 +
Properties set: 4 +
Labels added: 1
|===

Note that `name` is a string, as it is wrapped in single quotes in the output.
The third column outputs the string length as `size`.
The length only counts what is between the single quotes, but not the quotes themselves.

====

=== Check source data quality

> Especially in case of a failed import, there are some elements to check to ensure the source file is not corrupted.

Author: ```suggestion
In case of a failed import, there are some elements to check to ensure the source file is not corrupted.
```

- *Extra or missing quotes* -- Standalone double or single quotes in the middle of non-quoted text or non-escaped quotes in quoted text can cause issues reading the file.
Either escape or remove stray quotes.
See <<Quotes escaping>>.
- *Special or newline characters* -- When dealing with special characters in a file, ensure they are quoted or remove them.
- *Inconsistent line breaks* -- Ensure line breaks are consistent throughout your file.
We recommend the Unix style for compatibility with Linux systems. (and is compatible with windows? does it even matter, is not up to the jvm to do the parsing, which is system agnostic?)
- *Binary zeros, BOM byte order mark and other non-text characters* -- Unusual characters or tool-specific formatting are sometimes hidden in application tools, but become apparent in plain-text editors.
If you come across these types of characters in your file, remove them entirely.

==== Inspect source files ahead of import

Before actually importing data into the database, you can use `LOAD CSV` to inspect a source file and get an idea of what form the imported data is going to have.

[source, cypher]
----
// Assert correct line count

> LOAD CSV FROM "file-url" AS line

Author: "file-url" could use some variable markup

RETURN count(*);

// Check first 5 line-sample with header-mapping
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM "file-url" AS line
RETURN line
LIMIT 5;
----

> put a remote url and result of queries?

Author: yes :)

MERGE (a)-[:WROTE]->(b);
----

can we make this example with a significant dataset with many rows?

====

=== Avoid `Eager` operators

Depending on the exact shape of your Cypher query, the database may have to craft a query plan that contains the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/planning-and-tuning/operators/operators-detail/#query-plan-eager[`Eager`] operator.
You may discover if this is the case by link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/query-tuning/#how-do-i-profile-a-query[profiling your queries], and attempt tweaking them to avoid it in case.

=== Database heap and memory

> To help handle larger volumes of transactions, there are a few some memory configuration settings you may increase:

Author: ```suggestion
To help handle larger volumes of transactions, there are some memory configuration settings you can improve:
```

improve <-> tweak?

Labels added: 1065
----

== Other ways of importing data

There are a few other tools to get CSV data into Neo4j.

1. *The link:https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/5/tools/neo4j-admin/neo4j-admin-import/[`neo4j-admin database import`] command* is the most efficient way of importing large CSV files.
_Available only in Neo4j Desktop or Enteprise Edition instances._ actual?
2. Use a link:https://neo4j.com/docs/create-applications/[*language library*] to parse CSV data and run creation Cypher queries against a Neo4j database.

> 2. The *Neo4j ETL tool* allows to extract the schema from a relational database and turn it into a graph model. It then takes care of importing the data into Neo4j.

Author: ```suggestion
3. The *Neo4j ETL tool* allows to extract the schema from a relational database and turn it into a graph model. It then takes care of importing the data into Neo4j.
```

For more details and documentation, visit link:https://neo4j.com/labs/etl-tool/[Neo4j ETL Tool page].

> 3. The *Kettle import tool* maps and executes steps for the data process flow and works well for very large datasets, especially if you are already familiar with using this tool.

Author: ```suggestion
4. The *Kettle import tool* maps and executes steps for the data process flow and works well for very large datasets, especially if you are already familiar with using this tool.
```
